Now let's jump into some of the code and
just see how we can use
this frequency analysis.
And try to use it in a way that allows us
to visualize different parts of the track
without having to rely on
something like a biquad filter.
So in our demos, I have two here that
have to do with frequency analysis,
specifically in a way
that is kind of manual.
Just analyzing the frequency and
then acting on that data.
The first one just isolates the signal and
gives us different ranges of frequency.
So here we have an audio file
that is really strong in terms of
the kick drums and
in terms of the low frequency bass sounds.
And from that, we can start to visualize
a single circle, and then using the higher
mid tones, the voice, we can use that
to map those signals to another circle.
[MUSIC]
And then the second demo,
which is really just me sort of
trying to go further with this.
It's not really something
I'm gonna dissect today, but
it's something that you might want to look
into how it all works, is using frequency
to sort of map that to something
like a generative artwork almost.
This is based on Albers, so
Josef Albers artist, and
who created this a lot of work around
color and around these primitive shapes.
And basically, just taking those ideas and
seeing how do we reinterpret his
work through the lens of an audio
visualization of some kind.
[MUSIC]
It's the kind of work actually
which in such a small window,
it doesn't look like much.
But if you were to open it up full
screen and play it through projector,
it could be a potentially powerful audio
visualization in a physical experience.
So that's kind of what
the end goal of this is,
is not just to create something that looks
good in this little tiny thumbnail here or
runs just on your local host.
But maybe create something
that you can share and
create a sort of emotional experience for
the audience.
So let's dive into the frequency
example just to start.
[MUSIC]
So this frequency analysis demo is
very similar to some of the looping
streaming audio demo that we started with,
except it's using a different audio files,
using this blue jeans.mp3,
which is sort of an electronic track.
And then down here, we're setting
a few parameters on the analyzer node,
we're setting fftSize to be a little
bit higher because we want to
capture more resolution.
So a larger number here should give us
more data to work with, especially in
the low end, where there's not a lot of
data compared to the rest of the graph.
And because there's so much kick drums
here, we really wanna capture the detail.
We're gonna just use a larger value.
Just make sure whenever
you're setting the fftSize,
you have to use a power of two number.
So it has to be 1024, 2048, 4096, etc.
And then here,
we're changing the minimum and
maximum decibels that we're
expected to be working with.
So actually, I've just set them
now to the default values,
which is the same as what
Web Audio API gives us.
But you might find if you're using a
different audio source, you might want to
tweak these values, because maybe your
audio source is never getting this loud.
And so you're losing some of that
information if you're just using
the default values.
And then we set up our
float array as normal.
We have a couple functions
here that are new.
And they're a little bit sort of
mathy in the sense that they have
to use this nyquist value,
which as I mentioned briefly earlier,
is half of the sample rate
of the audio context.
The sample rate is how many
samples there are per second.
So if you remember one of my slides
was zooming in on the waveform and
seeing those little dots.
Well, imagine in a single second of time,
there's gonna be 44,100 of those dots.
That's the sample rate.
And each of those dots represents
a different sample of, let's say,
the waveform data, that we then gonna
convert into this frequency using the FFT,
the Fast Fourier Transform.
But again, this is usually set for us.
We don't need to worry about
what the sample rate is.
We just divide it by 2
to get this nyquist.
And then we use this math here to
figure out the actual index based
on a frequency band.
You don't really need to memorize
the inside of this function or
the math involved.
All you really need to know is that this
function allows you to pass in hertz.
So like we were saying in the spectrum
analysis, something like 200 hertz or
maybe 440 hertz if you're trying to find
the index in the array of that C node.
And then it returns the index
of the array between zero and
whatever it is that the array
has been defined as.
So like up here,
we're using fftSize as the array length.
And then the other way around is also
possible, just taking an index somewhere
in the array, and figuring out what
is the frequency band for that index.
And this third function here, and again,
these functions are all in the snippets.
So if you want to just copy and
paste, that's fine.
Quite often what I do with this is I just
write it once, and I copy and paste it or
I install it from NPM or
something like that.
So I don't really always remember
what's inside this function, but
inside this function here, audio signal.
The idea is that it gives us
back the signal between 0 and 1,
based on a specific band of frequency.
So we pass in the analyzer node.
We pass in the frequencies data
which is the float 32 array.
Pass in the minimum and maximum hertz
that we want to get the signal between.
So this is very similar to this slide
where we pass in the minimum which is
the left end of the band, and the maximum,
which is the right end of the band.
And then we're just gonna
compute the average
signal of all of the data in
between those two points.
And now, the way that works
is we take the frequency,
convert it to an index in the array.
And then we look through and
get the actual average from that.
And this average is in decimals,
there may be other ways of doing this
rather than just taking an average, but
maybe some sort of root mean squared
type of thing that might be superior.
This is just the way I've been
doing it and it seems to work okay,
it's definitely worth maybe
exploring that a bit further.
And it's one of the reasons I think that
using the biquad filter is actually maybe
a little bit better,
because the math that they use in terms
of the windowing isn't just
a hard start and a hard stop.
It's something more of a fall off,
and so it's a bit smoother and
a little bit better.
But this is nice just to sorta get an idea
of what's going on under the hood.
So we take the average, and
then we map that average from
the minimum to the maximum decibels.
So the frequency data that
we get is in decibels, but
we wanna convert it to a 0 to 1 value,
and that's what we're doing here.
And so from that,
you just put those things together.
You have your analyzerNode.getfloat
frequency data,
which is different than get float time
domain data, pass it into the array.
And then we use this
function audio signal, and
we pass in our minimum and maximum hertz.
And it gives us back some signal
between 0 and 1 that we can then scale.
[MUSIC]
Just as a little example of how to
do this with a different track,
let's say all of a sudden,
I wanted to visualize something that has
much different shape,
much different signal.
Let's say I wanted to visualize a piano.
You'll see that the yellow circle
is no longer really changing.
And that's because we're looking
at different frequencies.
So, let's say we open up
our spectrum which is in
the bottom of the repo by the way.
Spectrum.sh, but you can also find
it if you scroll all the way down,
Tool, Spectrum Analyzer.
And so let's open this up and
we'll drag in our piano.
Is FFT the only frequency analysis
supported by the Web Audio API?
With the Web Audio API,
it gives you this FFT out of the box, but
there's not really any other way to
analyze the frequency than that.
But if you wanted to do something
based on the frequency,
you could use the biquad filters
to sort of shape the signal.
So that it's only giving you some signal
that's within a certain frequency band or
that it's only giving you the top half of
the frequencies or something like that.
So that's how you can
use frequency analysis
without having to rely on actually
getting the frequency data and
then doing things with
the data samples themselves.
Okay, so
let's pop open this spectrum analyzer and
just drag in your mp3 file or
your WAV file that you want to analyze.
And we're gonna listen to it and
look at the graph as it's playing.
[MUSIC]
And again,
we'll see that if we use our mouse,
we can see where the signal's happening.
And it's happening between 120 hertz and
maybe 2.5k.
And so let's just use that for
now as, As the input here.
So, I'm just gonna go
back to my demo here.
And I'm gonna just use just one circle for
now.
Let's just say 150 hertz to 2,500.
And you can see that now it's very
clearly picking up only the piano nodes.
[MUSIC]
And we could try something else where
maybe we're only picking up let's say,
the very low piano nodes.
[MUSIC]
So now, the yellow circle's
representing the low tones
which are fairly constantly there
despite what node is playing.
Because there's always this sort of low
vibration that's happening whenever
the piano's getting struck.
But when the piano's getting struck,
there's also a higher frequency sound
that is specific to the node
that's being played.
And so that's how we can start to create
these interesting visualizations based on
these different audio sources and
different types of frequencies.